---
layout: post
author: Ian
---
For the 10th anniversary of *Demon's Souls*, here's my heretical take
on enjoying this game: forget the lore.

<figure class="figure float-right col-sm-4">
  <img src="/assets/images/des_art.jpeg" class="img-fluid figure-img">
  <figcaption class="figure-caption">
    <em>Demon's Souls</em> promotional artwork.<br>
    credit: Sony Interactive Entertainment
  </figcaption>
</figure>

A quality of the *Souls* series that is often praised is its old-school
sensibilities. Usually this is meant to refer to its difficulty; in contrast to
the game design philosophy of its contemporaries, (remember the big arrow in
*BioShock* that told you where to go at all times?) *Demon's Souls* seemed
indifferent about whether or not the player should be able to finish the game.
Along with the static positioning of enemies, this drew comparisons (at least
from me) to *Castlevania* and other brutally hard NES era titles. But, I think
this characterization is missing something that was a big part of the way I
received games of that era -- something that informed the way I would play
*Demon's Souls*, which would lead to it becoming a personal favorite of mine.

On a recent episode[^1] of the gaming podcast *Retronauts*, guest Gary
Butterfield offered his idea of a "40-70-90" rule for game worldbuilding: to
explain only 40% of the story leads the player to make unsupported conjecture,
to explain 90% (or even 100%) of the story is no fun, and 70% is a narrative
Goldilocks Zone that leaves just enough mystery to be tantilizing. Generally,
people seem to agree with this idea. There's an abundance of wiki pages and
YouTube explainers piecing together the games' lore from item flavortext and
NPC dialogue. The elusiveness of a more explicit story is one of the qualities
of the series that makes it so enduringly popular.

Despite that, I disagree with Gary's thesis. Not because I think there's a
right way to receive these games -- there isn't -- but because I'm so naturally
able to play them in the same way that I played games on the NES. I'm not sure
if my specific appreciation for the games is unique, but I do think that it's
worth offering as an option.

The NES was my first gaming console, but I didn't receive one until 1995 -- a
full decade after its release, a generation behind, and just a year shy of the
N64's debut. This meant that games were acquired secondhand, usually from yard
sales, and always without an instruction manual. Coupled with me being 5 years
old and having no knowledge of Nintendo Power (let alone access to back
issues), most of the games I spent my childhood playing existed in a context
vacuum. By necessity, I used a lot of imagination to add that missing context
to my games, and eventually I had built up a small personal mythos for many of
them: what the world was all about, who the characters and enemies were, and
how they fit into what (I thought) was going on.

When you're a kid, you have no realistic intuition for the hardware limitations
games are up against, especially those of the 8-bit era.  When *Pok&#233;mon*
became a hit in the late 90s, my friends and I trawled through countless
Maxpages sites for secrets and cheat codes, often swallowing the most
outlandish claims as truth. It was always something like, talk to this NPC a
hundred times, and he'll eventually get bored and give you [some made up item]!
There was no short supply of rumors and other kids at school claiming to have
access to secret or forbidden knowledge. This isn't uniquely a quality of older
games, but it's one that I associate with them because I was the right age for
it when I was playing them.

When I got my hands on *Demon's Souls* in 2009, I discovered that the game was
extremely obtuse with its storytelling. Other than an initial cutscene to set
the stage, you really only had the level design and the cryptic, unreliable
musings from the NPCs you would sometimes meet. As I dug my teeth into the
game, I also realized that there actually *were* very well-hidden secrets, some
of which might be discovered accidentally, while others required reading a wiki
or a walkthrough to properly activate. You could play through the game several
times and never meet certain NPCs, discover certain areas of a level, or divine
the purpose of a curious item. The crowning example of this is the Tendency
system, wherein the game's content may change in very specific ways without
ever notifying the player.  A locked door may suddenly unlock because of a
change in character or world tendency, new enemies may appear in places where
there were previously none, or a ladder might materialize and lead the player
to a previously unknown room. To further complicate things, as well as add
another layer of mystery, the game servers would slightly shift the values for
this stat with each new day, making it extremely unpredictable and hard to
manipulate. This was the kind of game those Geocities myth-makers described, in
a way.
 
So, that's what makes *Demon's Souls* a spiritually old-school game, or at
least for me it does. I wish these qualities had been embraced in the popular
discussion about the game, but they're admittedly more nebulous than the more
obvious triumps of level design, mechanics, multiplayer, et cetera. But, if
anyone has read this and *not* yet played one of these games, I implore you:
forget the lore, and embrace the mystery.

[^1]: <a href="https://retronauts.com/article/1313/retronauts-episode-246-demons-souls">Retronauts Episode 246: Demon's Souls</a>
