---
layout: post
author: Ian
title: Facebook's Redesigns and You
---
Recall the early Facebook, where your religion, sexuality, politics, and
hometown were prominently displayed under your profile picture. Remember
joining groups or delcaring your interest in a particular topic? Do you remember
removing it?

I recently moved, and I logged on to Facebook to update my current city. This is
publicly available information anyway, so I don't really have any qualms with
benfitting my friends and family by telling it (generally) where I live. But, I
also noticed a few things I had completely forgotten about: my relationship
status, education, a few books I've read, movies I've seen, places I'd geotagged
myself at -- all of this is still readily available, but some of it has been
decently obfuscated by Facebook's numerous redesigns and reorganizing of
content/information.

I think it's obvious that this is an issue, and it feels kind of sneaky. I went
though a couple profiles that I felt were overall more engaged with the platform
than I am (historically and presently) and found a few things that were
relatively benign, but probably something they would consider removing if they
remembered it was ever there. All of those groups you joined weren't deleted,
and instead now live buried deep in the all-encompassing "likes" section.

A lot of us willingly over-shared facets of our lives that we'd now rather keep
away from Facebook, or maybe some of that stuff was just embarrassing. It's a
shame that some of this stuff gets shuffled around until it's ultimately
forgotten; to the right actor, it has value. Maybe take a deep dive and un-like
that edgy joke group you joined in high school, too.
