---
layout: post
author: Ian
title: Finding Old Xanga Posts Right Where I Left Them
---
The most popular blogging platform of 2005 holds many of our most embarrassing
online musings. It would be a shame if someone found them!

I wondered recently if I could dredge up some old Xanga posts from the mid-00s
and relive that sweet era of the internet where many of my friends were just
beginning to stake out their own online presence. To me, this small epoch
represents a kind of golden age: people wanted their own space online, without
much hassle, and social media hadn't yet blossomed into another engine driving
corporate interests. Plus, you could learn a little CSS if you were inclined.
(What happened to this practice? Bring back custom stylesheets!)

So, where to look? Curiously, web.archive.org rarely yields any useful results,
although I remembered it working some time in the past. With that out of the
way, I poked around archive.org a little more, and came across
[this](https://archive.org/details/archiveteam_xanga) massive trove of Xanga
content. Unfortunately, there are 2 problems with it: firstly, it's massive in
its totality, and exceeds my storage/bandwidth/attention span. Second, the
archive was captured in 2013, well after the heyday of Something Corporate, and
also after Xanga introduced its weird profile locking feature. Many pages
scraped at that time would inevitably greet you with a prompt to log in before
being allowed access to the page.

At that point, I decided to try looking at the email address I had used around
that time. Luckily, I was an early adopter of Gmail, from back in the days when
the service was still invite-only. It probably wasn't the email I had when I
originally signed up for Xanga, but I would have been using it in my freshman
year of high school.

I had long forgotten this, but it turns out that Xanga used to send out regular
digest emails to its users, which would contain new posts from blogs they
followed. Through my original Gmail account, I was able to pull a few hundred of
my friends' posts, but sadly not my own. Nevertheless, it was great fun looking
through some of the things that were written and shared back then. I'm curious
to know if anyone who followed my blog also has access to these old emails, as
they seem to be the most accessible way to retrieve Xanga posts that are
meaningful to you.
